Add Option.tla module (#2116)
informalsystems/apalache: docs/src/lang/option-types.md

# Option Types

[[Back to Apalache extensions]](./apalache-extensions.md)

[Option types](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Option_type) are useful when you
want to internalize reasoning about partial functions. A simple motivating
example is division over integers, for which `n/0` is undefined.

The basic idea is as follows: given a partial function `f : A -> B`, we form the
type `Option(B)` by extending `B` with an element representing a missing value,
`None`, and lift each value `b` in `B` to `Some(b)`, allowing us to represent
the partial function `pf : A -> Option(B)`, such that, for each `a` in `A`,
`pf(a) = Some(f(a))` iff `f(a)` is defined, and `None` otherwise.

Apalache leverages its support for [variants](./variants.md) to define a
polymorphic option type along with some common utility functions in the module
[Option.tla][]. 

The module defines a type alias `$option` as

```tla
\* @typeAlias: option = Some(a) | None(UNIT);
```

However, due to the current lack of support for polymorphic aliases, this alias

> has limited utility, and  parametric option types can only be properly expressed
> with the variant type `Some(a) | None(UNIT)`. Nonetheless, in this manual

Reviewer: I first thought the variant differs from the definition above. Maybe better to explain:

```suggestion
has limited utility, and parametric option types can only be properly expressed
by writing out the full variant type `Some(a) | None(UNIT)`. Nonetheless, in this manual
```

page, we will sometimes write `$option(a)` as a shorthand for the type `Some(a)
| None(UNIT)`.

> In the context of TLA+, our encoding of option types is generalized over
> "partial operators", meanings operator which return a value of type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the context of TLA+, our encoding of option types is generalized over
"partial operators", meaning operators which return a value of type
```

`$option(a)`. Support for partial functions is supplied by two operators,
[OptionPartialFun](#OptionPartialFun) and [OptionFunApp](#OptionFunApp).

> ## Operators
> 
> ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
> 
> ### Constructing present optional values

Reviewer: I think the horizontal line here is redundant; it looks a bit strange when rendered.

```suggestion
## Operators

### Constructing present optional values
```

option.

**Effect:** Produces a new value of the optional type.

**Determinism:** Deterministic.

**Errors:** No errors.

**Example in TLA+:**

```tla
\* @type: Some(Int) | None(UNIT);
SomeInt == Some(42)
```

### Constructing absent optional values

**Notation:** `None`

**LaTeX notation:** same

**Apalache type:** `Some(a) | None(UNIT)`, for some type `a`.

**Arguments:** None

**Effect:** Produces a representation of an absent value.

**Determinism:** Deterministic.

**Errors:** No errors.

**Example in TLA+:**

```tla
\* @type: Some(Int) | None(UNIT);
NoInt == None
```
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Checking for presence or absence of a value

**Notation:** `IsSome(o)` or `IsNone(o)`

**LaTeX notation:** same

**Apalache type:** `(Some(a) | None(UNIT)) => Bool`, for some type `a`.

**Arguments:** One argument: a value of type `$option(a)` for some type `a`.

**Effect:** These operators are `TRUE` or `FALSE` depending on whether the
optional value is present or absent, in the expected way.

**Determinism:** Deterministic.

**Errors:** No errors.

**Example in TLA+:**

```tla

> TRUE = IsSome(Some(Int)) /\ IsNone(None)

Reviewer: I think the `Int` set here could be confused with a type; should we put a scalar instead?

```suggestion
TRUE = IsSome(Some(5)) /\ IsNone(None)
```

<a name="OptionFunApp"></a>
### Apply a function to a partial value

**Notation:** `OptionFunApp(f, o)`

**LaTeX notation:** same

**Apalache type:** `(a -> b, Some(a) | None(UNIT)) => Some(b) | None(UNIT)`

**Arguments:**

- `f` is a function
- `o` is an optional value

**Effect:** `OptionFunApp(f, o)` is `Some(f[v])` if `o = Some(v)` or else `None`.

**Determinism:** Deterministic.

**Errors:** No errors.

**Example in TLA+:**

```tla
LET f == [x \in 1..3 |-> x + 1] IN
/\ OptionFunApp(f, Some(1)) = Some(2)
/\ OptionFunApp(f, None) = None
```

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

<a name="OptionPartialFun"></a>
### Extend a total function into a partial function

**Notation:** `OptionPartialFun(f, undef)`

**LaTeX notation:** same

**Apalache type:** `(a -> b, Set(a)) => (a -> Some(b) | None(UNIT))`

**Arguments:**

- `f` is a total function
- `undef` is a set of values for which the new function is to be "undefined"

**Effect:** `OptionPartialFun(f, undef)` is a function mapping each value in
`undef` to `None`, and each value `x \in (DOMAIN f \ undef)` to `Some(f[x])`.

> This can be used to extend a total function a "partial function" whose domain is
> expanded to include the vaules in 'undef'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be used to extend a total function into a "partial function" whose domain is
extended to include the values in 'undef'.
```

Author: oop. swear I thought I proof read these :facepalm: Thanks for the fixes here!
